+++
title = "All Aboard the Gravy Train"
author = ["Ed Johnson"]
lastmod = 2021-12-14T11:54:38-08:00
draft = false
+++

“Hype is the plague upon the house of software.”
– Richard Glass

It is interesting to watch the software development landscape change underfoot.
As with many geographies, the tremors and shifts which at first appear random,
when more closely examined reveal an underlying order and structure that is more
familiar and less mysterious.

Recently, some of the loudest rumblings have been coming from that quarter whose
current fascination is the scripting language Ruby, and its database framework
Rails. Think back to the last cycle of hype you saw in our industry –
perhaps the Extreme Programming craze – and you'll recognize many of
the phenomena from that little reality excursion now reoccurring in the context
of Rubyism. There are wild and unverifiable claims of improved productivity
amidst the breathless ravings of fan boys declaring how cool it all is. There
are comparisons against precursor technologies, highlight faults that are
apparently obvious in hindsight, but were unimportant while those technologies
were in fashion. And above all there is the frenetic scrambling of the "me too"
crowd, rushing to see what the fuss is all about, desperately afraid that the
bandwagon will pass them by, leaving them stranded in Dullsville, where nothing
is cool and unemployment is at a record high.

But this crowd faces a real dilemma, for there are multiple bandwagons just ripe
for the jumping upon. Which to choose?

The Web 2.0 juggernaut has been on tour for some time, despite the lack of a
cogent definition. The AJAX gang have also been making a lot of noise, mainly
because the Javascript weenies can't contain their excitement at being in the
popular group again.

But how and why does all this techno-fetishism get started?

Now Departing On Platform One

“Welcome aboard the gravy train, ladies and gentleman. Our next stop
is Over-enthusiasm Central. Please be advised that critical thought and a sense
of perspective are not permitted in the passenger compartment. Please ensure
that your safety belt is unfastened while the red dollar sign is illuminated. We
know that you have a choice of bandwagons, and thank you for your choice to bet
the farm upon this one. We promise – this time it'll be different."

The endless cycle of technological and methodological fashions that so
characterizes our industry is the result of a symbiotic relationship between two
groups – the sellers and the buyers.

The sellers are the parties who are out to create a "buzz," generating a desire
for some technology-related product. They include the corporate vendors of new
technologies such as Sun and IBM. Alongside them are the pundits and
self-promoters who are looking to make a name for themselves. They attach
themselves to particular trends in order to cross- sell themselves as
consultants, authors and speakers. Hot on their heels are the book publishers
and course vendors, who appear with remarkable speed at the first hint of
something new, with a selection of 500 page books and offsite training courses
to ease your transition to the next big thing. The buyers are the developers who
hear the buzz and are drawn to it. And for many, that draw is very strong
indeed, for a variety of reasons. First, many developers are fascinated with
anything new simply because it is a novelty. The desire to play with new tech
toys is what got many into IT to begin with, and is still their main source of
enjoyment in their working lives. For others, the lure of a new technology lies
in the belief that it might solve all their development woes (rarely is it
stated directly, but that's the tacit promise). It's classic "silver bullet"
thinking of the sort Fred Brooks warned against 25 years ago, but which is just
as deceptively attractive now as then.

Incoming technologies have the same advantage over their predecessors that
opposition political parties have over the governing party; the shortcomings of
the existing option have been revealed through experience, but the shortcomings
of the incoming option are unknown because nobody has any experience with it.
This makes it easy to make the incoming option look good by comparison. You just
focus on the problems with the old technology, while saying nothing of the
problems that will inevitably accompany the new one. The newer option has an
image that is unblemished by the harsh light of experience. The new technology
is promoted as a key ingredient of forthcoming software success stories, but
those pieces of software are just vaporware, and vaporware doesn't have any bugs
or suffer any performance or interoperability problems.

It should also be acknowledged that there is a psychological and emotional
appeal to placing such emphasis upon the technological aspect of software
development. It alleviates the burden of self-examination and introspection upon
work practices. It is much easier and more comfortable to think of all one's
problems as being of external origin, leaving one's self blame free. "As long as
the problem is "out there" somewhere, rather than "in here", we can just jump
from one silver bullet to the next in the hope that maybe this time the vendors
have got it right. Heaven forbid that the way we apply those technologies should
actually have something to do with the sort of outcome we achieve.

But think of this:

Of all the failed and troubled software development efforts you've been involved
in, there is one common element ... you.

Your Regularly Scheduled Program

Some developers enjoy this perpetual onslaught of marketing efforts, for it
keeps them well supplied with new toys to play with. But some of us are both
tired of the perpetual call to revolution, and concerned for the long term
effect it has upon our profession. I belong to the latter group.

The main danger that this ever-changing rush to follow technological fashion has
upon us is to distract us from focusing on those aspects of our work that really
matter – the people who are doing the work and the working methods
they employ. Do you think that the technologies you use really make much
difference to the outcomes your achieve? I suggest they are generally quite
incidental. To understand why, consider this analogy.

Suppose a group of professional writers gather together for a conference
discussing the nature of the writing activity. You would expect them to broach
such topics as plot, character development, research methods, editing techniques
and so on. But suppose they spent their time discussing the brand of pen that
they preferred to write with. If one author claimed "My writing has got so much
better since I started using Bic pens" - would you not think that author might
be missing something? If another claimed "That book would have been so much
better if it'd been written with a Parker pen" - you might again think that the
speaker has missed the point. If a third claimed "I write twice as much when I
use a Staedtler pen," you might think that the author is probably making things
up, or at least trying to rationalize a behavior that is really occurring for
emotional or psychological reasons. But isn't this exactly what we developers do
when we claim "This project would have been so much better if we'd written it in
Ruby" or "I'm twice as productive writing in Java as I am in C++"? In other
words, our focus is all wrong. We're preoccupied with the tools we use, but we
should be focused on the skills and techniques with which we wield those tools.

At the organizational level, this fixation with novelty often works to create a
bad impression of IT's capabilities and proclivities. If those that make the
strategic technology decisions for a company are the type to get carried away
with the latest fads, then that company can find itself buffeted by the
ever-changing fashions of the technical industry, always switching from one
"next big thing" to another, with no concern for long term maintenance burden
and skills investment. It is easy to create a portfolio of projects implemented
in a broad range of diverse technologies, requiring an equally diverse set of
skills from anyone hoping to later maintain the project. A broad skill base is
seldom very deep, so staff become neophytes in an ever-increasing set of
technologies, none of which have been used for a sufficient time for them to
gain a high level of expertise. From an outsider’s perspective, the
IT section seems to be a bunch of boys playing with toys, terminally indecisive,
that for some reason needs to keep re- implementing the same old applications in
progressively newer and cooler technologies, though successive reimplementations
don't seem to be getting any better or more reliable. It seems that every six to
twelve months they suddenly "realize" that the technologies they're currently
using aren't adequate and a new technology direction is spawned. All that is
really happening is that the novelty of one technology selection has worn off
and the hype surrounding some new novelty is beckoning.

Think of the organizational detritus this leaves behind. You've got legacy VB
applications that can only be maintained by the VB guys, legacy J2EE systems
that can only be maintained by the J2EE guys, a few .NET applications that only
the .NET guys can comprehend, and that Python script that turned out to be
unexpectedly useful, which no one has been game to touch since the Python
enthusiast that wrote it resigned last year.

How many companies, do you suppose, are now left with monolithic J2EE systems
containing entity beans galore, that were written as the result of some
consultant's fascination with application servers, and their compulsion to
develop a distributed system even if one wasn't required. And how impressed are
the executives in those companies who find themselves with an enormous, sluggish
system that appears to have gone "legacy" about five minutes after the
consultants left the building. Can we be surprised at their cynicism when
they're told their system will have to be rewritten because it was done poorly
by people who didn't really understand the technologies they were working with
(how could they – they were learning as they went). How can they
leverage their technology and skill investments when both seem to become
irrelevant so rapidly?

What's The Better Way?

Thankfully, it doesn't have to be like this. But avoiding the harmful effects of
technology obsession requires some clarity.

At the organizational level, it requires senior technicians to have the maturity
and professional responsibility to put the interests of the business before
their personal preferences. It means developing technology strategies and
standards based solely upon benefit to the business. It means remembering that
there is no ROI on "cool." At the individual level, it means adopting a
skeptical attitude towards the hype generated by vendors and pundits; and
turning one's focus to the principles and techniques of software development,
which transcend any technology fashion. Your time and energy is better invested
in improving your abilities and skills than in adding another notch to your
technology belt.
