+++
title = "The Hazards of Being Quality Guy"
author = ["Ed Johnson"]
lastmod = 2021-12-14T11:33:44-08:00
draft = false
+++

Perhaps you've seen the Dilbert comic about Process Girl. At a meeting, the
Pointy Haired Boss introduces Process Girl as "the one who has the answer to
everything", at which point Process Girl chimes in parrot-like with "Process!"
She then denounces the meeting as inefficient because the participants have no
process to describe how to conduct a meeting. By a unanimous vote she is
expelled from the meeting. As he escorts her out of the room, Dilbert offers by
way of consolation "at least you lasted longer than Quality Guy."

And now I must reveal a shocking truth ... ladies and gentlemen (rips open shirt
to reveal spandex body suit with "Q" emblazoned on the front) ... I am Quality
Guy. I am that much maligned coworker that you love to hate. I am your local ISO
champion, the leader of the Software Engineering Process Group and the mongrel
who overflows your inbox with links to articles about process improvement. I'm
the trouble maker that asks embarrassing questions in meetings like "why aren't
we doing code reviews?" and "where's the design documentation?" I am the one
that dilutes your passionate discussions on J2EE and SOAP with hideously
unfashionable prattle about CMM and the SEI.

And like my namesake in the Dilbert comics, I am ostracized by my peers and
colleagues. I am renounced as being a "quality bigot" and dismissed as
impractical and too focused upon meta-issues to actually achieve anything
worthwhile. I am perceived as an impediment to real work and characterized as a
self-righteous, holier-than-thou elitist. My suggestions of ways to improve my
team's work habits are interpreted as personally directed criticisms and thereby
evidence that I am "not a team player". From my point of view at the periphery
of the team, the earnest activity of you and your geek friends seems somewhat
farcical. You seem to be perpetually distracted by the shiny new technology toys
that the vendors are constantly grunting out. You are hopelessly addicted to
novelty and consumed by the frenetic pursuit of the latest bandwagon. You seem
to be entirely unconcerned that "beta" is synonymous with "buggy" and "new" with
"unproven". The projects of my successive employers march by me like a series of
straight-to-video movies, each baring the same formulaic plot wherein only the
names of the participating technologies have been changed to protect the
innocent. I feel compelled to yell out "stop!", "think!" and "why?", but it is
hard to be heard when you're in geostationary orbit around Planet Cool and in
space, no one can hear you scream. Friends, this is what it is to be Quality
Guy, and it ain't no party.

If you think you or a loved one might be in danger of becoming a Quality Guy
sidekick, let me offer you this one piece of advice â€“ never reveal your true
identity to your coworkers. It is a sure recipe for alienation and isolation.
Keep your shirt closed to the top button, so that your superhero garb will go
unnoticed. Eschew all quality-related terminology from your public vocabulary
and substitute terms from the jargon file1. Hide any books you might have that
do not relate directly to a technology.

When it comes to development practice, with a little ingenuity you can institute
a number of quality-related practices within the sandbox of your own development
machine, without needing to reveal to others that your sphere of concern extends
beyond the acronymic:

-   If you find yourself in an environment without version control, install a free
    version control system such as CVS or CS-RCS on your own machine. You can at
    least maintain control over those files that you are immediately involved
    with.
-   If there is no prevailing coding standard, employ one for your own code
    without revealing to others that there is any guiding hand of consistency in
    your code (that would be un-cool).
-   If there is no unit testing, write your own in a parallel source tree visible
    only to yourself using the free xUnit package appropriate to your platform.
-   Ifthereisnodesigndocumentation,reverseengineertheexistingcode into some
    hand-drawn UML diagrams and then stash them away where others won't find them,
    keeping them just for your own reference.
-   No requirements? Start your own mini-requirements document as a local text
    file, and question the developers and senior team members around you to try
    and flesh it out. You can at least try and restrict uncertainty with regard to
    your own development objectives.

Remember, the secret to surviving as a Quality Guy is to keep your true identity
a closely guarded secret. That way you can still be one of the gang and remain
non-threatening whilst still being able to take some satisfaction from the
limited degree of quality enforcement you can achieve through isolated effort.
